Is point to. It should be loud enough on your top. Okay. So I just leave that because that's my reverberation. Okay. Okay. That's good. All right. I should be audible since Okay. I'm just like sandal. Hi everybody. My name is Eileen Lou. I am subbing in for Dr. Tessa Scott today as the facilitator for this class. Tessa will be back next week. She's currently in Mexico City presenting on her current research at a conference there. Okay, But today we're going to be hearing two lectures from two more brilliant Berkeley faculty. Our first lecture today is with Dr. Doris to Dr. Doris Tau is a professor of neurobiology in the department of Molecular and cell biology. And she's also an investigator at the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. Dr. received a BS in Biology and Mathematics from Cal Tech and a Phd in Neuroscience from Harvard. Prior to teaching at UC Berkeley, she was a professor at Caltech. Her research is focused on understanding the neural mechanisms underlying vision, and how visual objects and actions are represented in the brain and are used to guide behavior. Doris Tau has received notable awards and honors, including the Eppendorf and Science International Prize and Neurobiology, and the Macarthur Fellowship. She was elected to the National Academy of Science in 2020. As a reminder, we're going to hear from Dr. Tau first. Her lecture will last approximately 30 to 40 minutes. And then we'll have time for Q and A. And for those of you who are attending here in person, just wait for the microphone so that people who are live streaming can hear your question as well. And for those of you who are watching on the live stream, we're using discussion. So feel free to post questions on that forum during the lecture. And we'll turn to those questions when we have a chance. The second half at 01:00 we'll hear our second lecture from Dr. Ted Miguel, and I'll give the introduction at that time. Now please join me in welcoming Dr. to thank you so much for the kind introduction, Eileen, and thank you for inviting me to participate in this wonderful lecture series. I'm really excited to be here and have the opportunity to share with you what we're finding out about a phenomenon that I think is very important to all of you. Conscious perception, I assume that all of you are conscious right now. The central problem I'm interested in is how the brain generates conscious visual percepts. How can electrical activity in a network of microscopic neurons generate, for example, the conscious experience of a rose? This question has two parts. First, how does the brain represent things in the outside world? I think all of you had a beautiful introduction to this question last Friday from Professor Veronica Gomez Sanchez. Although I have to say, I believe that rather than approaching this problem with philosophy, it's best to approach it with neuroscience. Because I think it's a very exciting and concrete scientific problem. How does the brain represent objects in the world? I'm going to show you how we go about doing that. But beyond this basic question of how the brain represents the outside world, there's the question of how does the brain generate conscious experience? For example, the experience of the particular shade of Red Rose. Why do we have conscious experience at all? How can electrical signals between neurons, which is a perfectly understandable, prosaic physical event, generate this categorically different phenomenon of subjective experience? Why aren't we all just robots implementing some optimization functions that get us to propagate our genes efficiently without experiencing anything inside at all. I think this question, how does the brain generate conscious experience is the deepest mystery in all of science. There's many people who think it's not even amenable to scientific inquiry. But I believe that we can tackle it and I hope to show you how we're doing this overall. What I want you to get out of lecture today is an appreciation for how these two questions, which strike at the heart of our subjective experience of the world, are incredibly exciting scientific mysteries. We can address them using the same tools of observation and logic that we use to understand objective physical reality. I want to start by telling you about how I got interested in this question of how the brain generates a conscious representation of the world. I remember I was ten or 11 and I woke up one morning. And for some reason the question popped in my head, is space infinite or not? This question really bothered me because I couldn't conceive of it as not being infinite, right? Because even if there were a wall all around it, that wall would still be occupying space. Yet the idea that infinity might actually exist was terrifying and incredible to me. I remember feeling this genuine sense of terror, and this is the first time I'd ever experienced having a real question about the outside world. Then in high school, I encountered Immanuel Kant's critique of pure Reason, I read the first 50 pages here, actually discusses this very question of whether space is infinite or not. He comes to the conclusion that we can only conceive of space and time as being infinite because they're what he called pure forms of intuition. They're like glasses that we can never take off through, which we experience everything in the world. This was an amazing idea to me, that space which seems like something so real and outside of us is actually constructed by the brain. Then a few years later in college, I encountered the monumental work of Hubo and Weasel. David Hubel and Torsten Weasel were two neuroscientists who were trying to figure out how vision works. In the 1960s, they inserted electrodes in primary visual cortex. Primary visual cortex is the first area in the cortex where visual information arrives from the two eyes. Electrode is just a very thin metal wire that's insulated everywhere except at the very tip. When it gets close to a neuron, it can actually pick up the electrical signals from the neuron. You send them to an amplifier to get amplified, and then you can analyze it. Hub and Zl found something astonishing. In primary visual cortex, each neuron in this part of the brain responded to a visual stimulus only in a specific region of space. The neurons didn't respond to just any visual stimulus in that part of space, like the way photoreceptor in your eye would. Instead, they were exquisitely selective for edges. Every neuron required an edge to be present. Furthermore, each neuron responded most strongly to an edge at a specific orientation, with different neurons preferring different orientations. Here you can see an example orientation, selected neuron that fuel weasel recorded from. You can see the three or these six edges in each of these edges was presented to the cat. Then to the right, you can see the sequence of vertical bars and those are the electrical signals that were fired by the single neuron. You can see that this neuron responded most strongly to a vertical bar. Reading about this work was really a lightning bolt for me. Because it was obvious that Ubon and Weesel had only just scratched the surface of understanding how the brain represents the outside world, like what happens next. Could we use the same tools to figure out the entire sequence of steps by which the brain represents the outside world? Could you even understand how the brain is constructing space itself? I talked in my talk today. First, I want to introduce you to the experimental arena in which we're going to address how the brain generates conscious visual percepts the face patch system. Then I'm going to tell you how we figured out the neural code that cells in this region used to represent facial identity. You can see this as one specific example of how neuroscientists go about this general problem of figuring out how the brain represents the world. Finally, I want to dive into this question about how the brain generates conscious perception. Let's get started. In my live, we study mechanisms for visual perception in macaque monkeys which have visual system remarkably similar to ours. In particular, macaque brain contains a network of regions called the face fatch system. That turns out to be a remarkable gift from Mother Nature for visual neuroscience, and I'll explain why in a second. Here you can see a side view of the macaque brain. I just told you about how cells in primary visual cortex, also known as B one, are selected for the local edge orientation. After B one visual formation goes through a series of additional stages where it's more and more complex features are being extracted, like angles and textures and so on, until it reaches a large brain region called infrotemporal cortex, or IT cortex. It cortex is important for representing high level object identity. People knew this because you could have a stroke in this region. And what happens is that you've become selectively unable to recognize a specific class of high level objects, say faces. While your ability to recognize other high level objects is fine, it's clear that this piece of the brain is very important for high level object recognition. When I was a grad student, I was scanning monkeys inside an FM RI scanner to try to find brain areas that were important for representing three D space. Because as I told you, that was my obsession. Then just as a fun side project, I decided to show the monkey pictures of faces and other objects. I did this because I had read a paper by a scientist at MIT that claim that the human brain has an area that's dedicated to processing faces. This area was discovered using FMRI. This result seemed really strange to me because just from introspection, faces didn't seem all that special that they needed their own area. I did this experiment when I showed the monkeys pictures of faces and other objects. I actually found not just one, but six regions that were selective for faces. Okay, So they responded much more to faces than to other objects. And these regions were all located in infratemporal cortex, which is this region that people knew is part of the brain that cares about object recognition. I originally found these patches using FMRI, functional magnetic resonance imaging. This is a way to look at blood flow across the brain. This is an incredibly coarse and slow signal, right blood flow. People call it the brain's plumbing. To try to understand what the single neurons within this region are doing, I inserted an electrode into one of the face patches, just like Hub and Weasel had earlier. In one what I found basically changed my whole career. Now I want to show you a movie of one cell from a face patch. This is actually one of the first face cells I ever recorded from. I want you to experience what it's like to be a neuroscientist. You're going to hear these clicks which represent the electrical pulses fired by the single neuron in a face patch. You're also going to see the sequence of images that the monkey saw when we were recording from the neuron. Okay, let's try this. I hope you could all hear how this cell responded very selectively to faces. I see some nodding. What was amazing was that cell after cell were just like this. All the cells in this region responded selectively to faces. I thought this was incredible. I remember calling up my dad at 02:00 A.M. after this first experiment to tell him about this, because it was clear we had found a gold mine. By studying these cells systematically, we had the potential to figure out exactly how a set of neurons can represent something so complex as a face. Before we go there, you might be wondering why are there six space patches? The answer turns out to be because they're each doing a different step in face processing. Processing, the visual system generally increases in complexity going from posterior to anterior. The cell I just showed you was recorded from the middle face patch, ML. Now I want to show you another movie of a cell that was recorded from the most anterior face patch. Am I want you to listen carefully and see if you can tell what this cell is responding to. Okay. So could you guys tell it was basically responding to the one blond guy, right? And it was responding to him regardless of where he was looking. I hope they can hear me now. I hope you could hear how this cell was very different from the cell that I showed you earlier. Right? The first cell responded to every face. And this cell was very selective for the individual identity in a way that was a bar in head orientation. Before I tell you about how cells are extracting identity, I want to give you a visceral sense for what this whole face patch system is doing. I'm going to do this by lesioning all of your face patches in, all of your brains get ready, Okay? Right now all of you have a sion to your face patches and now I'm going to reverse the lesion. The reason this works is because cells in the face patches turn out to be very selective for upright faces. And they respond a lot less to upside down faces. When you show a face that's upside down, it's mimicking a brain lesion. This illusion makes clear that what your face patch system is doing is distilling the distinctive identity of a face. Without the face patches, all faces would look really similar. Because this distinct identity is in small details, you really need the specialized machinery to extract it. As another window into what the face patch system is doing. We can ask what happens if you artificially stimulate the face patch and impose a random pattern of activity on the responses of the neurons. I'm not able to stimulate each of your face patches artificially. Right now, in this experiment by Joseph Parviti, who's a neurosurgeon at Stanford, He was treating the patient who had electrodes in his brain that were implanted for the purpose of finding the source of epileptic seizure. And then one of the electrodes just happened to be located in the human face area, which they had localized pre operatively with FMRI. And so this patient consented to have the surgeon pass a small amount of electrical current through the electrode. Okay. And you'll see what he experienced. Okay, so we're stimulating a face patch in a human 123, he just turned into somebody else. To your face metamorphosed, your nose got saggy, went to the left. He almost looked like somebody I had seen before but somebody different. That was a trip. Did I keep my gender? Yeah. How did you know not the female that are still wearing the sue, you could see the son, your face changed, Everything else was the same, only the face changed. How do the cells in a face patch actually represent facial identity? We wanted to understand the feature code used by the cells to represent facial identity so that we could predict responses of cells to an arbitrary face. And also go backwards and use the responses of a bunch of cells to reconstruct the face that evoke those responses. To figure out the brain's feature code, we first needed a way to parametrize faces. I describe each face by set of numbers. We considered various computer vision models For doing this, I'm going to tell you what we found with one of these models called the Shape Appearance model. This model describes every face by 50 numbers. The first 25 numbers describe the so called shape of the face, and the second 25 numbers describe the so called appearance of the face. Okay? So here you can see a movie of a face that's changing only in the shaped parameters, right? So those parameters are capturing the locations of the key landmarks. Here you can see a movie of a face that's undergoing changes only in the 25 appearance parameters. So all the landmarks are fixed, but now the overall texture map is changing right, like the complexion and so on. Okay, so this appearance parameters are capturing this texture map. Okay, so this shape appearance model gives us a way to describe every face with 50 numbers. Now that we have a way of parametrizing faces, we can generate a stimulus set to probe how the brain is representing facial identity. In our stimulus set, we randomly drew 2000 faces from this 50 D face space. Then we presented these 2000 faces to the monkey while recording from cells in two face patches. Importantly, we showed the same 2000 faces for every cell that we recorded from. Because we wanted to understand how each face was coated by a population of neurons. As a starting point, we can plot the tuning of cells to each of the 50 shape and appearance parameters. Here you can see the tuning curves of two example cells to the first three shape parameters and the first three appearance parameters in this plot. Here, the X axis is the value of a particular face parameter, and the Y axis is the response of the neuron. You can see that cell one was tuned to this third shape parameter, and cell two to these two appearance parameters. Notice how all three curves are ramp shaped, with the minimum at one extreme and a maximum at the opposite extreme. This was true across the population. This ramp shaped tuning turns out to be incredibly convenient because it means that we can directly read out the value of a particular face feature from the response of a neuron that's tuned to that feature. So if we record from a lot of neurons, then we can do this for each feature. Once we know the value of all 50 features, then we can actually reconstruct the face. What this means is that you can walk into our experiment room and look at the monkey. I could be in a different room just listening to the neurons, and I have no idea what you look like. But just from the neural activity I should be able to create from scratch a detailed picture of your face. It should look exactly like you. Do you believe that this is actually possible? Here's an actual face that we show to the monkey. Here's the reconstruction using neural activity from just 205 face cells. Here are three more examples. You can see that the reconstructed faces match the actual faces almost exactly. People sometimes say a picture is worth 1,000 words and I would add or 200 neurons. When I first started working on face patches, a lot of people told me face processing is a really, really specialized system. It's a total unicorn. You're not going to learn any general principles about object recognition by studying face processing. But it turns out that the face patch system actually provides a Rosetta stone for understanding object coding in general. Remember this large brain region called infrotemporal cortex that's responsible for object recognition in general? I told you about the beginning. We found that this region is actually spatially organized into a series of maps of object space. Face patches are representing one quadrant of the space, but there are three additional object networks representing the other quadrants. They're just like the face patch system. By sampling neural activity from all four of these networks, we can actually approximately reconstruct arbitrary objects from just a small number of neurons. You can see these reconstructions are far from perfect. But remember, we're only using a few hundred neurons, which is a tiny, tiny fraction of all the cells in IT cortex. All I hope the story I've just told you gives you a sense for how neuroscientists tackle the question of understanding how the brain represents the outside world. Now I want to turn to this deeper mystery. How does the brain generate conscious experience? When we see a face, We don't see 50 numbers. Instead we have this very specific experience of seeing a face. How is that experience generated? Can any of you tell what this is? Have you seen it before? You could just tell, yes, it's a cow. Now, can you see it? Okay. Now I'm going to help you. How about now? Okay, hopefully now you can't help but see that there's two eyes and a nose and so on. All the pieces should click in your consciousness to tackle the problem of how the brain generates conscious visual percepts. We've thought long and hard about this peculiar fact about visual consciousness, that we always perceive visual details in a way that's consistent with the high level interpretation. Here's another example. If you see this as a frontal face, then you also see this piece of edge as owned by an includer on the right. Well, if you see it as a profile face, then you see the same piece of edge as owned by the face on the left. We know that our perception of the overall orientation of the face is computed late in the visual system in IT cortex, while perception of who is owning that piece of edge is computed early in the visual system. Here again, our perception of the solution shows that we always perceive visual details in a way that's consistent with our high level interpretation. We think this fact is actually a critical clue to the mechanism that the brain uses to generate conscious percepts. Specifically, we think it suggests that consciousness is generated by a mechanism called analysis by synthesis. I think this is a really profound idea. Here's how it works. When an image comes in, it first passes through a series of hierarchically arranged processing stages in a feed forward direction to build a parsimonious model of the input. For example, an early stage might be local edge detection. The later stage might involve extracting these 50 shape appearance parameters that we talked about in the face patches. The end result is a rough semantic representation, but we're not done. The analysis by synthesis framework says that the visual system should then try to synthesize the detailed image predicted from this initial high level interpretation through feedback connections. When we see face in this ambiguous image, then all the features would be regenerated in the context of the high level interpretation of a face, including all the local figure ground relationships that are represented in an early visual area. When we see a tree and some birds in the same image, then all the features would be regenerated afresh in the context of the high level interpretation of a tree and some birds. The proposal is that what we consciously perceive is entirely due to this regenerative process acting through feedback. This is a somewhat wild idea that we can identify consciousness with a specific anatomical pathway in the brain. But if it's true, I hope you can see that it would beautifully explain why our conscious perception is always consistent across all levels of interpretation. Our perception of details is always consistent with our high level interpretation. The explanation would be simply that it's generated to be so right. To test this, we're using an ambiguous illusion called binocular rivalry. In binocular rivalry, you show two different images, completely different images to the left and right eyes. Then what you consciously perceive is very interesting. You see the two images alternating in an all or none way. Right? You'll see the house and then it'll flip to face, and then house again, and then face. It does this semi stochastically. You don't see a mixture of the two images, you just see one or the other. You can get an idea of what rivalry is like here. If I ask you how many windows are there in the house, you should see something different from. If I ask you, have you ever met the sky before? But this is much weaker than rivalry where your percept really flips completely between the two images. If you don't believe me, you're welcome to come to our live and check it out for yourself. You might wonder, how can we know what the monkey is consciously perceiving without talking to him? We accomplish this using a clever trick that was developed by Janas Hess, who was a grad student in the lab at the time. What he did was train the monkey to follow a fixation spot that moved differently in the two eyes. Here, if the monkey is following the fixation spot in the right eye, then we know it's perceiving the house. If it follows the fixation spot in the left eye, then we know that it's perceiving the face. And in human subjects who perform this eye movement task, we could predict button press reports of what they consciously perceived with 93% accuracy. That means that this task gives us a good way to read out what the monkey is actually consciously perceiving. Without having to train it to press buttons or talk to us what's happening across the face patch system during these switches and conscious perception. To address this, we've been recording simultaneously from face patches at different hyerarchical levels using this cutting edge new tool that's been recently developed, the HP Neuro pixels probe. This probe has over 4,000 contacts, letting us record activity from hundreds of neurons simultaneously. You can compare with the electrode that Hubel and Esel used to discover orientation selectivity, which had a single contact at the very tip. This is an incredibly powerful and exciting new piece of technology. Here you can see responses of over 1,000 simultaneously recorded neurons from two face patches to the onset of a face. The key question we wanted to answer was, how is the conscious percept born in the brain? According to the analysis by synthesis framework, the birth should happen in a high level area that's representing our semantic understanding. Then it should propagate backwards to early areas that are representing the details. This is something that we can actually experimentally test by asking whether representation of the conscious percept flows from top down or bottom up. And here you can see a four second long snippet of activity from two face patches during binocular rivalry. Okay, so the monkey was looking at one image in one eye, another image, and the other eye, and the stimulus was absolutely fixed. Yet astonishingly, we saw these extremely strong fluctuations in activity that are more tightly correlated between these two face patches. You might think maybe these switches are related to switches in the conscious percept, but they're happening actually way too frequently. This is a histogram of the inter switch interval. The monkey's percept was changing only once, around every 7 seconds. I don't have time to go into detail about how we analyze this rivalry data, but in essence, what we did was analyze what the cells are representing across these two patches at each moment in time. Okay, what we're finding is that representation of the conscious percept is actually occurring in discrete slices of time that are interleaved with representation of the unconscious physical reality. Perceptually, what you experience is a prolonged period of seeing a face followed by a prolonged period of seeing a house. You almost never see a mixed stimulus. But we analyze what the neurons are representing a H mom time, we find that they're actually representing this mixed physical stimulus more than half the time. This was a huge surprise, right? Because you never see this mixed stimulus consciously. This suggests that the seeming continuity of consciousness may actually be an illusion that stitched together. The idea that consciousness is actually discontinuous was predicted by the visionary philosopher Julian James in his seminal book on Consciousness. He writes, consciousness is a much smaller part of our mental life than we are conscious of, because we cannot be conscious of what we're not conscious of. How simple that is to say. How difficult to appreciate is like asking a flashlight in a dark room To search around for something that does not have any light shining upon it. Flash light, since there's light in whatever direction it turns, would have to conclude that there's light everywhere. Consciousness can seem to pervade all mentality when actually it does not. Incidentally, in this book, James was trying to establish that consciousness is not necessary for most cognitive functions. You could even build a whole civilization without consciousness. If you're curious how that could work, I highly recommend this book. Okay, so I hope you can now appreciate how by recording from neurons across the brain, we can see beyond the flashlight of our subjective experience to understand how the gears of how consciousness is actually generated. Before I close, I want to pose a puzzle for you guys to see how closely you've been paying attention. Okay, earlier I told you about the idea of analysis by synthesis. Just now, I told you about this empirical finding that representation of consciousness is interleaved with representation of physical reality. The puzzle. Can you see how these two ideas can connect? Interview. Okay, let me just remind you. The idea of analysis by synthesis is that the brain is regenerating the original image from the top down, right. There's speed forward path and then there's top down path that's regenerating the image. Idea two here is the finding that half the time during binocular rivalry, the brain is representing the mixed physical stimulus, even though the stimulus remains unconscious. Okay, how can these two ideas be connected? Yeah, please. Yes. You're saying that something very interesting is happening in the gaps. Right? And that's exactly right. So we think these two ideas would fit together perfectly if conscious experience is generated during multiple cycles of feedback half the time. And then physical reality, which you're not conscious of, is represented through these feed forward passes the other half of the time. Okay, so to summarize, overall I've tried to show you how using the tools of neuroscience, we can figure out how the brain is representing the world. We can begin to understand how the brain generates consciousness. Finally, I was trying to think of one piece of advice that I could give to you. From my experiences as a scientist. I think it would be something related to how precious the sense of mystery is. My life as a neuroscientist began with this question about space that struck me when I was ten years old. If something arouses your sense of mystery, I think that's sacred and you should treasure it and nurture it and make it grow. Thank you very much. Thank you, Dr. To that was a beautiful thought to end with. I'm getting teary just thinking about that. I want to start with a question that we've been asking all of our speakers to think about, which is what does your research process look like? And I think your talk follows so wonderfully on last week's talk by Dr. I loved her talk so much and I also am very curious what, because she talked a little bit about what her research process looks like as a philosopher. And so I'm very curious to hear and maybe we can ask students as to think about the comparison. What your research process looks like given your disciplinary methods and trainings. Yeah, if I recall, her process was a lot of thinking. Our process is really collaborative. Right. I'm not doing this by myself. We have a large a lab and it's really the grad students and post docs who are driving the science forward. The process, first we have to find each other, right? Like we just really resonate on the big question we want to understand of conscious, visual perception and we all really want to go after that. And then it's a matter of designing the experiments to break that down, make it actually scientifically tractable. And then we do the experiments, we have predictions they might not pan out, and then we'll change, the process continues. And I have a follow up question that in response to that, you said earlier, you mentioned the monkeys being in the lab, and you also mentioned that students can also come into the lab. Can you say a little bit more about that? Okay, I should say that you, that was a thought experiment. That you would come into the lab and just look at the monkey, there's all kinds of restrictions against that. Wonderful. And one last question, then I'm going to turn to some of the questions on Ed discussion. And then we'll open it up to questions from students who are here in person. For students who are interested in pursuing this kind of research, what advice would you give them? Are there opportunities, for example, for undergraduates to get involved in research in your lab or with colleagues in your department? Yeah, absolutely. You know, we have an extremely vibrant Neur science program at Berkeley. We just started a new Neur Science department here, actually. So there's many labs and my advice, if you're interested, is just read up on some of their work so you can then write an informed e mail. And yeah, you should just e mail like half a dozen people and I'm sure that you'll have people who are interested. Yeah, thanks so much. Okay, I'm going to turn now to a question from our Ed discussion. Okay, so one of our students asks, I see you recorded the brain activity of monkeys for your research. Why did you choose to use monkeys instead of humans as research subjects? A monkeys are the closest experimentally tractable model that we have to the human brain, right? So I told you that the space area was actually discovered first in human. But obviously we can't insert an electrode into a human brain to understand the details of how the brain is processing visual information. We really do need to have single neuron data, as you saw, right? The different neurons were tuned to these different shape and appearance parameters. So it's really essential to have that level of access, observational access. And so that's why we use monkeys. And I should say that I take the privilege of being able to work with monkeys extremely. I consider it the greatest privilege I have ever and will ever be able to receive. Right. I know that it's a very fraught decision, but I think this research is really important questions. Hello? Yeah, thank you for your talk. I'm curious, why did you decide to show the monkeys pictures of human faces instead of monkey faces? Yeah, we actually showed them both. And the principles of representation are the same for both. The average response to human faces and monkey faces in our monkeys is also approximately the same. We could have, we could have shown money, you know. I could have presented this talk showing monkey faces as well. Yeah, thank you so much for your talk. I'm curious if you saw any difference in brain activity, if you like, between the monkey faces and human faces or gender or race that like explain some sort of like xenophobia or something like that. Ah, yeah. There's actually a very well known phenomenon called the other race effect, where we're much better at recognizing faces from our own race, right? This is because these patches, they really acquire their selectivity through learning, right? So there's like this rough innate preference for round objects in this part of IT cortex. But then for these cells to become so exquisitely sensitive to different facial identities, that's totally learned. In fact, if you take a monkey that doesn't have any face experience, it doesn't develop these face patches. The reason why I think the monkey respond just as well to the human and monkey faces is because they actually have the same amount of experience with both. They're raised with a lot of monkeys, but definitely like our perceptual machinery is so heavily dependent on our experience. H, Yeah. Thank you so much for your talk. I was wondering, we had a sleep talk earlier in the semester and I was wondering if this type of neuroscience could explain something to do with sleep, especially recognizing friends or different interactions within a dream, and how you recognize items or instruments inside of when you're sleeping. Yes, I'm so glad you asked that, right. Because I talked about this generative pathway, right? That consciousness is generated through feedback. And there's many reasons to think that the brain should have this generative pathway for reconstructing reality. And one of the biggest ones is the fact that we're able to dream right During dreaming, your sensory inputs are completely shut off by your thalamus and everything that you're seeing is internally generated. I think that's an extremely interesting phenomena that we can actually study in sleeping dreaming monkeys. And seeing how the neuroactivity is orchestrated across these patches during dreaming. We're very excited about that, actually we're getting ready to do those experiments. I was just wondering in like the ram shaped tuning curves. Were there specific neurons responding to shape only and specific responding to appearance? Or were there like groups in the face patches that responded to both? Yeah, it turns out that I told you about these six patches. The middle face patches actually had many more cells tuned to the shape parameters and the anterior patches had many more cells tuned to the appearance parameters. We actually think this makes sense because this anterior representation is more invariant, right? Like you saw in that one movie, that cell just respond to that one guy and it didn't care what the shape parameters were. Right. Didn't care where he was looking. It's like a more abstract representation. Yeah. Thank you so much. I was wondering, does the location ever vary dependent on developmental age of the monkey? Or even experience of the monkey? Like, you know, where it came from, where it was born, and who it grew up with. Because I imagine a lot of these experiences and like you said, are shaped by our experiences and that's how they form. Does that ever affect the location of where different images are processed? Yeah, very interesting question. The earliest that these face patches have been imaged is around one month. What's really interesting is that at that age, you can already find these patches and they stay in exactly the same locations. What changes over time is how selective they are for faces, but the locations don't change. The idea is that there's some very basic process that sets up IT cortex. It's representing this object space, right? This one quadrant where faces are located is like round things. There's also a quadrant for spiky things and stubby things. This round area that's like, it's just determined by very, very early experience, even before one month. Then after that, the cortex can become more tuned to your specific, what you need to recognize, right? It turns out in the human, there's also a word form area that responds much more to words in language that you know. That's obviously due to learning. Yeah, But the location really doesn't change that much over time. We'll take one more question. Thanks. Thank you for the talk. So my question is, how do you have a theory as to the connection between neural activity and the subjective experience that one has, like the hard problem of conscious. Oh my God, Thank you for asking that. I do my, I've read so many books on consciousness and I love all of them because I think they're discussing the most interesting question, the hard problem. And I hate all of them because I don't think any of them come close to answering it. And I see you smiling. I think you probably have the same experience. My conclusion is that we have to accept that objective reality exists and that subjective reality exists. That's like an axiom. The physicist cannot prove why anything should exist, right? All they're doing is writing these equations to simplify what's happening and to describe the dynamics. But they can't say why anything exists in the first place. I think it's exactly symmetric. We also can't say why subjective experience should exist. What we can do, what we're trying to do is figure out the laws of subjective experience, right? Can we simplify it and be able to predict for any neural network that's going to be conscious, that's not, that's going to experience colors, that's going to experience sounds right. I think we can do that. And I think right now in this age of AI, like those possibilities are just exploding in our imagination at least. Yeah, I think it's a great question. I don't think that anyone will ever be able to give a theory, a scientific theory for why subjective experience should exist. That's all the time we have for questions. Please join me in thanking Dr. to once again for her lecture today. We're now going to take a ten minute break. For those of you who are live streaming, just note we're going to be stopping and restarting the live stream for the next lecture. So you may need to refresh your browser at this time to access the restarted stream. And see everybody back here at 01:10 For Dr. Ted Miguel. Hey there testing Mike, check 12. Testing Mike check 12. Oh, is that her ID? Is that pretty good? Higher that. Okay. And you can test 123. Can you hear me in the back? Yeah, you can hear me. Okay. We can Now that sounds good. Stay until you just do it should turn off, right? Yeah. All right, we're going to get our second half started. Thanks everybody for being here. I was just talking to Dr. Miguel during the break and also Dr. Tau. And thinking about these connections that we're starting to see between the lectures each week and you're strongly encouraged in your written reflections to think about those places of convergence or maybe even divergence like the kinds of questions that seem to be the big fundamental questions that seem to be recurring throughout our speakers research. I now have the pleasure of introducing our next speaker, Dr. Ted Miguel, who is the Distinguished Professor of Economics, the Oxfam Professor of Environmental and Resource Economics, and the faculty director of the Center for Effective Global Action at UC Berkeley. Dr. Miguel received his SB in Economics and mathematics from Mit and a Phd in economics from Harvard University, where he was a National Science Foundation fellow. He has been a visiting Professor at Princeton University and at Stanford University. Dr. Miguel's main research focus is African economic development, including interactions between health, education, environment, and productivity for the poor. He has conducted field work in Kenya, Sierra Leone, Tanzania, and India. Dr. Miguel has received the Berkeley Campus Wide Distinguished Teaching Award and the Kenneth J Arrow Prize awarded by the International Economics Association. He was elected as a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 2020. Please join me in welcoming Dr. Miguel. Thanks so much for having me. Can you all hear me okay with the mike? Great, it's great to be here. And I really love the previous talk. I learned so much and just delighted to share this slot with Dr. to. I'm really happy to get the opportunity to tell you about my research today and really about the broader landscape in development economics, which is my field. I'm an economist, I work on international economic development. And I focused on economic development in Sub Saharan Africa in my career. And the reason I focused on that region was really because Sub Saharan Africa, when I started working in this field in the 1990s, was the world's poorest region and had the lowest living standards. It was the region of the world with the fastest population growth, the region of the world with the highest rates of political violence and armed conflict. And it was also the region of the world with the highest rates of infectious and tropical diseases, HIV, et cetera. So there were really a range of major economic development challenges facing Sub Saharan Africa. And actually this is a photo that I took in a school in Kenya in the late 1990s when we started working on a health project there. And that's really what I'm going to focus on today is what we learned from that project. And also how the work in this area helped to change how economics also does its work. Where was I when I started working on this project? I was a graduate student at Harvard as was just mentioned, I came into this field with a lot of interest in poverty per se, really trying to understand the causes of persistent poverty around the world. I was also very interested in the environment and climate, as well as politics, different interests. But in my research I've been able to combine those interests in various ways. And yeah, that's me a long time ago when I was maybe closer to your your guys age for sure. In this visit in 1998 when I was working in Western Kenya on the project I'm going to talk about today, I actually got to experience firsthand what it was like to be living in East Africa during a very strong Elo year. This is actually an Alo year. Now people are aware of all the flooding we're experiencing. Well, 1997, 98 in East Africa was a time of really extensive flooding, extreme weather events, and it had big consequences for people at the time in this region. So the land behind where I'm standing there is really farmland, but it was totally flooded out. When we had to get around this part of Kenya in that year, very often roads were washed out. So it was a very challenging environment and the whole health and sanitation environment deteriorated. People's latrines, they're like outhouses where most people use the bathroom were flooded. There was a lot of infectious disease. It was a very challenging health setting as well. In my own mind, it drew out the links between extreme climate and health very directly. Because I was experiencing it when I was there at the time and really stimulated a lot of my subsequent research. Okay, so let me step back a little bit and talk about economics at the time that I started working in the field in the 1990s. And I think those of you who heard the lecture by my colleague David Card a few weeks ago, heard about some of this evolution of economics as a field. So some of this is going to be familiar to you, although the way it played out in my field of development economics is a little bit different. Economics traditionally has been a field that's been very heavy on sophisticated theorizing, conceptual work. We've made a lot of progress as a field, thinking about how the world works, thinking about logical possibilities, and drawing implications for the real world. But it's only more recently that we've become a more data driven and really scientific field where we're able to test theories, maybe reject them, and move on to different models of the world. So that's really the kind of work that I do as part of that trend. And Dave Card, my colleague who won the Nobel Prize several years ago, was one of the real pioneers in this approach in economics. And we've kind of built on what he got started. So we've tried to advance this kind of research in low and middle income countries around the world. Like a lot of the poor countries in Sub Saharan Africa. But to do so, we faced a lot of challenges. Actually, more challenges than folks working, say in the US or in European countries faced. So the first one was, in order to be data driven, we need data and we need lots of data to do the right types of statistical analysis. But a lot of the governments that we work with in poor low income Sub Saharan African countries don't collect the kind of systematic administrative data, government records, income tax data, et cetera, that we rely on in rich countries. So one of the things we had to do in our field is generate our own data and figure out ways to collect original data. That was one big challenge that we faced. Another big challenge that we faced is a lot of the government programs or interventions that we studied really weren't set up to be evaluated. And what I mean by that is the targeting of those programs could have been systematically correlated with lots of other factors which makes it hard to understand the impact of those programs. So I'll give you an example if we're studying an anti poverty program that gets targeted to the poorest people. If we look at the correlation between getting a program and being poor, it's very high. But that's not the cause of the program, right? It's precisely because the program was targeted to the poor, that people get that program. Over time though, it may be hard to understand the impact of that program because we don't have any other group of people to compare the recipients of that program with. It's a kind of fundamental point, but it becomes very hard to evaluate public policy when we don't have a good comparison group or control group. That confounding or omitted variable bias becomes very important. The third factor that we faced in doing research in settings like East Africa and places like Kenya where I've been working, is the lack at the time of research capacity in the country where we're working. Collaborations were difficult because there were very few Phd economists, for instance in Kenya. When we started doing this work, there wasn't the research infrastructure we rely on. This was a challenging problem that we faced to try to tackle the issues that were important to deal with them. We develop some new approaches, and you're going to see an illustration of it today. The first and probably most important one is together with colleagues, and I'll talk about it more later on. Today, we started applying experimental approaches to our research. In particular, we started applying randomized control trial methods, which are like medical trials, to study the impact of different policies and programs. I think people are familiar with a randomized control trial. There's a treatment group and a control group. Will we work to adapt those approaches to study the issues that we care about as development economists, mainly related to poverty alleviation. In addition to adapting RCT's, we also developed new approaches to collect data that I'll tell you about. Finally, as a big part of this expansion of research on international development, we made it a priority to develop new collaborations with scholars in the countries and regions where we were working. And really start, in some cases, new ethical discussions about the right way to do research in these settings. Okay, so there was a lot that we aim to do with our work. Okay, so that's like the big picture concepts. What did we do? In particular, back in the mid to late 1990s when I started working in Kenya, the issue that we were very focused on with my collaborators and my main co author was my advisor at Harvard. At the time, Michael Kramer was the link between infectious disease and economic development. There are a wide range of different infectious and tropical diseases that affect people, especially in poor countries, especially in Sub Saharan African countries. From malaria to sleeping sickness, to cholera, to typhoid. The particular infectious disease that we focused on are intestinal parasitic infections. Those infections are also widespread, some of the most common diseases in the world over the last few decades. It's estimated that about one in five people at any given point in time have intestinal parasites. They're very widespread. And in the region of Western Kenya where we worked on this project that I'm going to describe in a minute at baseline in 1998, 93% of kids in the area had intestinal worm infections. So basically everybody had these infections. They were just incredibly widespread. And they are spread typically through poor hygiene and sanitation. So all that flooding of latrines that I talked about early on was a real problem. Because when latrines flood, that can lead to the spread of lots of different diseases, including intestinal worms. The way intestinal worm infections are spread is the worms that are in your intestine release eggs or larvae that are then passed out of your body and your fecal matter. Sorry for getting so graphic. Hopefully no one's having a late lunch. But basically when that fecal matter is in the environment, if other people come into contact with it, they can become infected themselves. If they come into contact with it, they may ingest those eggs. For particular types of worms, the worms could bore through their skin. Some of the other worms are waterborne. There's several different related worm infections, but they're all spread through infected fecal matter. That's the bad side of it. There's only two silver linings to these worm infections. The first one is the worms that live in your intestines, that bore into your intestines and stick there. They have a limited lifespan. They only typically live about one to two years on average. If you can reduce reinfection and prevent people from continuing to get come into contact with infected fecal matter within a pretty short amount of time, those worms in your body are going to die off and you're going to become healthier. The worms don't reproduce in your body. All the worms in your body are the product of an external infection. That's the one kind of silver lining. The other silver lining is what is shown in the photo there. There's a very simple way to treat worm infections. You typically only need to give kids with these worm infections, one or two pills, once or twice a year, depending on the type of worm to clear the worms that are in their body. These are very effective drugs and they're very cheap. When you deliver these treatments at scale, you can typically treat a kid for less than $1 per year. That's very cost effective. And that was one of the things that really drew us, especially as economists, to this program at the start was we knew these were widespread infections. We knew they had a range of nutritional consequences. They can lead to anemia, growth, stunting, et cetera. And we knew they were very cheap. If there were really any benefits to this treatment, it could be very cost effective as an investment. That was really the idea we had in mind as economists. All right, so what was the theory we had in mind or how did we think about this problem when we started working on it in the late 1990s? Again, we're working in a setting with very high rates of worm infections, with almost every kid in the primary schools where we were working having some type of infection. Those infections affect health, make kids weak, stunt their growth, give them anemia. There had been some claims about broader effects on cognitive development. What we were interested in then was measuring what happens when these infections were treated on things like schooling. We could measure their school attendance, We could measure their test score performance. And try to figure out if making kids healthier improve their schooling. Again, as economists interested in poverty, the next step for us was trying to understand how those gains in health and schooling then may translate into broader effects on people's economic lives, their labor market outcomes. All of you here who are at Berkeley are going to school. You're learning. You're gaining skills. And we all believe that those skills will help you in the job market, they'll help you be productive out in the world. We wanted to study that question. If you invest in kids health and human capital, do they become more productive? Do they earn more money later on? Are they more likely to migrate for job opportunities? And out of the poor rural area where we were working then? A pipe dream at the start. But I'm going to tell you what we've learned since then is if we follow these individuals long enough, is it the case that improving their health and maybe their economic lives even affect the next generation, affect the lives of their own children? Remember, one of our big questions as development economists is why is there a cycle of poverty? Why is it so persistent? Why are some parts of the world, generation after generation so poor? Well, could we actually see that by investing in health, we change the intergenerational transmission of poverty. These were our kind of questions that we were interested in at the start as economists. But we faced a lot of challenges, as I mentioned. We faced challenges in terms of confounding and trying to understand the impact of programs. We faced measurement challenges, just the data wasn't available. So let me talk about those two things in turn. More of the conceptual and methodological issues and then the data. One of the things that's interesting about stunning infectious diseases is the effect of treating one person may go beyond that individual. It may actually affect the community as a whole. I think all of us are more familiar with these epidemiological issues. Now after covid, my masking or my vaccine choice could affect others because others could get infected. I knew I was positive, but I still went to a restaurant to eat. Maybe I'd get ten people sick at that restaurant. So there's something very similar at work with other infectious diseases, including worms. And so this is just a animation to illustrate that. Imagine if one person in a community has worm infections in a setting with inadequate sanitation, where infected fecal matter goes out into the community. Well, in that case their infection could spread to others near them. Could spread to their neighbors, classmates, siblings, who'd then become infected themselves. But then those individuals could go on and spread the infection to other people. Again in a setting without adequate sanitation and hygiene, et cetera, until eventually the whole community is infected. And this was very much the situation at the start of our study. Remember, almost every kid had worm infections. They were infecting and reinfecting each other over time, and there were very high worm loads. Another factor for us at baseline in 1998 was the fact that that was an El Nino year. Sanitation was particularly bad, The health environment was particularly poor. We caught a situation that was particularly bad. The flip side is if you do treat one individual, it could generate positive spillovers for others. If you knock out that first infection, they're not infecting other people and then those individuals won't infect others, et cetera. There could be big multiplier effects of treatment or spillover effects of treatment. We were very interested in those things. As part of our original research on this study, we developed some new statistical tools in economics, in what's called econometrics, the branch of economics that applies statistics to try to measure those spillover effects. That was one of our goals. The other methodological approach that was novel at the time was using randomized control. Trial methods. As I mentioned before, economists typically at this point in time, in the '90s, did not run experiments. We gather data from the real world where we could get it and analyzed it. But using experiments helps us get around a lot of those confounding issues that I talked about before. In particular, the program that we studied was done in collaboration with a local non governmental organization. An NGO that was interested in school health. They were a very small NGO. They were only working in a few schools, but they were starting to do some deworming in some Kenyon schools. We partnered with them, talked to them about our interest in this issue and convince them to work with us to evaluate the impact of their program. But they were only able to expand gradually. Over time, we identified a group of 75 rural schools in Western Kenya where they hadn't worked yet. The NGO told us, look, we can only expand gradually, maybe 25 schools at a time. We convinced them, in one of the first experiments of this kind in economics, we convinced them to phase in across those 25 schools in a randomized order. We helped them randomly choose 25 of the 75 schools to be group one schools. They would get treatment with deworming in the first year. Again, due to the constraints of the NGO, they couldn't expand all 75 right away in this area with great need expanding Seem fair to them and the communities at the time. In the next year, another 25 schools were randomly chosen to start receiving the deworming pills. And then two years after that, the third group was phased in. What this gave us was something akin to a medical trial. Those schools that were randomly chosen early on to receive treatment could be compared to the schools that were only phased in a few years later. To judge the impact and estimate the impact of the program, that's really what I'm going to rely on to talk about results today, is that variation in treatment timing due to the experimental design. Again, because the schools were randomly chosen between the different groups, there's nothing systematically different about them. They should be the same. And in fact, when we look at their characteristics, the group 12.3 schools look very similar in terms of demographic, socioeconomic characteristics as they should given the experimental design. The other thing we did in the design that turned out to be important is we stratified, meaning we grouped together schools by location, and then randomized into the different treatment arms within those locations. What that means is near individual treatment schools, there were very often other untreated schools nearby. One of the things that we can do is try to understand the importance of these transmission effects and say, look, if I'm an untreated school right near that treatment school that's getting the pills. Do I experience health gains? Why might that be the case? Well, if all the kids in that school that are getting the pills are treated, they're not passing worm infections on into the environment. And that could affect and benefit kids nearby, even if they didn't get the drugs themselves. We're also able to estimate those spillover effects here. So those are some of the key elements in the design. But without good data, we can't even estimate these things. The other challenge that we face was how to gather data. Early on, together with partners in Kenya, we developed mechanisms to collect detailed data on the schooling of kids. This started in 1998 at the start of the project. Primary schools in Kenya, at that time went from grade one to grade eight. They were a combination of like primary and middle schools In the US. The age range we focused on was about age eight to 15. They were younger kids and also some adolescents. And we collected detailed data on their school attendance, their learning. And the first paper that we wrote based on this project was based on that early data. You can see some superscripts in these slides. These are all references to different papers. If you're really excited about the particular research studies, just e mail me or get in touch and I'll share the full reference list, which is the last slide here in the presentation. That was the short run result. Then we went on to be a bit more ambitious, and we decided to try to follow up a representative subset of the population over time to see if we could measure impacts on economic outcomes, not just the short run health and schooling outcomes. So a few years later, we started collecting data on individuals. We first started with paper surveys that our interviewers would collect over time. Of course, we started collecting data on tablets. And this started when these folks were adolescents and young adults. And it's actually continued over time through what's called the Kenya Life Panel Survey all the way to the present day. We're currently now in 2024 in our fifth follow up round of the KLPS. These individuals, 20 something years later, are now typically in their mid to late '30s or early '40s. There's been this very long term longitudinal data collection where we measure economic outcomes, income health outcomes, their family status, whether they've had children themselves. We send our interviewer teams all around Kenya and East Africa to interview people in person. So it's a pretty large scale data operation. And again, we can't just rely on government data because this data isn't being collected by anybody else. If we want to understand these things, we have to measure them ourselves. And we've really been fortunate to have generous donors that have allowed us to do that. We've also put a lot of time and effort into the data collection. So over time, we've been able to have direct contact and survey 86% of the original participants. So again, it's a pretty challenging thing to do, to follow up individuals over time, for decades as they move around. But that's something that we've been able to do in the study and one of the things we're proud of in the research, but having this very representative take on the population allows us to hopefully say something scientifically rigorous about the impacts of the health improvements due to deworming. All right, so that's the big picture on the methodology and the data. But what's really left is what did we find? What were the results? What did deworming do? What happened when there were kids who were sick and we were able to cheaply make them healthier. Did it have a big impact on their lives or were there just so many other factors getting in the way that prevented this treatment from leading to benefits? That was really the question we asked, and I think when we started we didn't know the answer to it. The scientific community didn't know the answer to it. There's a lot of reasons, conceptually, why there could have been benefits or there could have been things standing in the way of benefits. But that's why we do science. We want to measure what happens in the real world without knowing the answer in advance. What did we find when we got started? The first thing we documented in the early years of the program was that these deworming drugs were very effective at improving health. They really killed off the worms in people's bodies. You can see the solid orange bar shows that the number of serious worm infections in kids bodies when we measure them several months after treatment really fell dramatically. The drugs were effective. It doesn't go down to zero because there's some reinfection even soon after treatment. Not everybody took the pills. They were absent on the day that the pills were administered. But still dramatic improvements. The dashed orange bar shows the reduction in these serious infections at nearby untreated schools. On average, it actually turns out, even if I don't get treated, if I'm living near a treatment school, I'm just getting reinfected way less and my own health improves. This is a demonstration of the spillover benefits that I showed you in the graphic before. They were real, they were large. And actually the statistical approach we used that we developed to estimate these effects has become widely used in economics in these kind of experimental settings. Okay, health improved. What happened to education? There were also significant improvements in school attendance in the treatment schools. The kids, again, all of whom were infected at baseline, who get healthier because they're getting deworming drugs, start going to school more by about 11% Again, even the untreated kids nearby are showing some gains in their school attendance. There are spillover gains there too. The first paper that we wrote back in 2004, Michael Kramer and myself showed those impacts. Again, this was our first demonstration that these child health investments can affect human capital in terms of education. But that was just the beginning. As I mentioned, we keep going back to collect data over time, including on a range of different economic impacts 10-20 years after those initial treatments. When we find people and survey them wherever they're living in Kenya or East Africa. And we measure their income when we measure their spending. So that's another way to measure living standards. What they're able to consume, what they're able to purchase when, whether they've been able to migrate to cities for jobs where there's often better opportunities. We see significant gains of roughly around 10% on average across all these different measures. Again, a 10% income gain is not going to end poverty in Kenya. But it's meaningful to go from really, maybe being on the edge of subsistence and hunger in some cases, to having seven per ten, 14% more spending could be meaningful for a poor family. Again, these are statistically significant effects. The last step in the chain was over time, the individuals we studied started having their own kids. And we were able to measure the outcomes for their own children. And in fact, by the time of the fourth follow up round, which just finished a few years ago, over 80% of our participants had had kids of their own. Then the question is, is there an intergenerational effect? Is it the case that when you invest in the health of one generation, the health of the next generation actually gets affected in a study, a new paper that we're just sending out for publication now, we actually document that under five mortality for the children in those early treatment groups, groups 1.2 versus group three. In the diagram I showed you before, under five mortality falls by about a fifth. And it's statistically significant as well. There's a change even in the life chances of the next generation. You might say, wow, that's a really big effect. But remember, folks in the treatment group got more schooling. They were healthier themselves, they're earning more. They're more likely to live in cities, and we document in some of our surveys, they're also better able to access health care. All those things taken together combine to improve the outcomes for the next generation. We were able, in this study, to put together evidence over several decades to try to start making progress on that original question of how can we break the intergenerational transmission of poverty and our investments in health may be part of the answer. The answer so far from this data in Kenya is yes. They could be part of the answer. You can actually meaningfully improve living standards and the next generation. In this way, as economists, we also wanted to think of deworming as an investment and make progress on that question. Deworming is very cheap. A lot of school health interventions actually are quite cheap. This 12 to three additional years of deworming treatment would cost one to $2 per kid, something like that. You can see that dash line across the figure here. In our first study, published in 2004, we hypothesized about what the future earnings gains would be due to deworming. Without any evidence, we just had those early health and schooling gains. Our best guess at the time was that deworming might improve earnings by about $30 That seemed pretty good, pretty cost effective if you're getting $30 back for each dollar that you spend. But we were actually, over time, able to measure this directly because we kept tracking people over time and looking at their actual earnings and their actual living standards. When we look at people actually about ten years after the deworming treatment, the measured gains and earnings were something more like $119 per kid. When we go back after 20 years and we measure those gains, there's somewhere between 200 and maybe $400 per kid every year. That goes by because they're earning more, the economic gains add up. Of course, in some ways this is a very conservative estimate. We're not even pricing in here or putting a monetary value on improved health per se. Being healthier is valuable per se, even if you're not richer. We're not putting $1 value here on all the lives saved, all their kids lives saved. That's a hard thing to do, but presumably that's also very, very valuable for people. So this is a very conservative estimate, and these kinds of numbers and these very high rates of return are part of the reason why a number of donors started becoming interested in deworming. As I'll tell you about people interested in effective giving, effective donations. Effective altruism also became interested in this treatment because it is so cost effective. The flip side of this that I'll say if we think about generalizing these results, is remember this was a setting where, again, 90 something percent of kids were infected, many with pretty serious infections because the sanitation environment was so bad in the baseline year. Clearly, in settings where there's very few worm infections, you're not going to get these kinds of returns. You're going to have to scale those down. But in settings with lots of worm infections, these would be the relevant estimates. All right, so what happened as a result of this work? As I mentioned, this was one of the handful of very early randomized control trials in development economics. One of the early ones in economics as a whole. My co author, Michael Kramer's picture there was awarded the Nobel Prize in economics in 2019 because of this work in bringing randomized control trials into, into economics, focusing on these manageable analytical problems. So it was very exciting obviously for me to have our paper be one of the heavily cited papers in the scientific announcement for the Nobel Prize. This Deworming study as really one of the lead examples of the use of this method in development economics beyond the recognition academically, one of the things we were able to do here at Berkeley is really build a set of new institutions and organizations to try to take these early examples and early successes and build them into something larger and something more durable. Together with colleagues here at Berkeley, we founded the Center for Effective Global Action, Sega, which is one of the world's leading research centers in international development, Based right here at Berkeley, although it spans many campuses now, with over 150 faculty affiliates. And what Siga researchers, faculty, grad students, undergrads, and others have done is apply these kinds of methods. Randomized control trials, original data collection, other data science methods to problems in international development. Even beyond health, we do a lot of work in health like deworming, but we've worked on education issues, agriculture, credit and microfinance, climate related issues. I myself have worked across many of these different domains, taking the tools and really applying them. Now there have been thousands upon thousands of experimental studies and development economics, many following on the kind of model of the Deworming study. And it's not just here at Berkeley. We have great partners globally and in other institutions in North America, in other countries at the World Bank that are also advancing these goals working together, these are kind of our like sister institutions. At the same time that we've been building up infrastructure here at Berkeley, we've made it a central goal to engage, collaborate with, and provide training for the next generation of scholars in East Africa, West Africa, other regions where we work to make sure that the tools that are being developed really are global. And that there are partnerships that are international and collaborative. So this is just a photo of three recent visiting scholars from both East Africa and West Africa. The scholars here from Kenya, Nigeria and Tanzania, who visited Berkeley last semester to take classes at Berkeley. Forge research collaborations with me and other colleagues. I'm actually working with Peter Tena who's on the left there, who's a Kenyan researcher to do the next generation of work in this area. In the last decade, over 60 visiting scholars from Sub Saharan Africa have come to Berkeley to take classes and collaborate through Siga's work. So this is just an important part of building a truly global community. And of course, scholars from a particular society are going to have a insight and understanding about their own society that's hard for outsiders to really get. These global collaborations are going to lead to much faster scientific progress. That's our hope. Finally, even beyond the academy, the research findings have gotten a lot of media attention. I just put some of the media coverage up here. The combination of the academic recognition, the media attention attention in some other communities has actually led to policy change. I wanted to end with this point because this is an example of where research has actually had a pretty big impact on policy, starting in 2009. After my colleagues and I and our Kenyan collaborators gave a large number of presentations, we shared our results, spoke to government ministers. The government of Kenya in 2009 started a national mass school based warming program based on the model that we used in Western Kenya, in Busca, Kenya. Starting in 2009, they started with about 3 million kids getting dewormed. In a decade after that, it was up to more like six or 7 million kids a year. And the program has continued. And now prevalence with intestinal worm infections among Kenyan school kids is in the single digits, about 6% Remember at baseline it was over 90% In our study region. So there's been huge policy change in Kenya, flowing from the research, and the Kenyan government has pointed explicitly to our research studies in justifying these programs, But it actually goes beyond Kenya. Other NGOs and other donors have funded projects in large countries around the world. There's been mass national programs in India, in Nigeria, in Pakistan, large programs in Ethiopia and other African countries. In fact, in 2020, 2/200000000 kids alone were dewormed by an NGO called Evidence Action. Again, explicitly citing this body of studies. There's four or five different research papers that we've written that go into this body of research. But over time, this one NGO has given out almost 2 billion doses of deworming. Again, drawing on some of the evidence from these studies, it is possible to do. Doesn't always happen. It doesn't have to happen. But it is possible that research on important topics can change policy and can change the world and in this case, can improve the health and the lives of maybe hundreds of millions of kids around the world. I just want to end on that point and come back to, we're here at Berkeley. A lot of folks are thinking about their own goals, their own steps. I'm so proud of being part of this research project because I feel like it's the most Berkeley research project possible. Our goal was to bring the most rigorous scientific evidence and intellectual evidence to bear. That's really what Berkeley is known for. But to focus it on an issue of real importance. Not something that necessarily just benefits the most privileged, but really can benefit people around the world of all circumstances. We tried to take that rigor and put it on a global challenge. I know there's a lot of people in the room that may also be thinking about their own goals, their own spark, their own challenge. It doesn't have to be in health, It could be in government. It could be in advocacy. It could be in business, could be in scientific research. It is possible here at Berkeley for your light bulb to spread and for there to be spillovers of your idea globally. I think this research is just one example of the kinds of things that Berkeley is producing, I think every day that can be positive globally, fiat looks. Thank you so much, Dr. Miguel, for that illuminating talk. And I want to start by asking again a question that we've been asking many of our speakers over the weeks. And I think your last slide touches on this, the spark of this research project which has spanned several decades of your career and also your research mentor. What was the origin for this big question that you posed on one of your earlier slides? You know, I think for us the role of health and the possibility that tropical disease was a barrier to development was just so apparent for the time we had spent in East Africa. It was all around us, there were so many different health burdens people were dealing with. And yet it was something that in the development economics research literature, there was little really solid evidence on. And I think that was the gap that we were hoping to fill. It seemed so important in our lived experience visiting this region. And yet no one could quantify what the benefits were. So I think that was really the nugget of it. Yeah. So if I could maybe extrapolate from your answer. So it was a combination of what you had a hunch about you and your collaborators had hunch about, as well as a gap in the field in which you were being trained. And then I think we were fortunate that this NGO that we were partnering with had an interest in health. They were just starting to do work and it just felt like a great kind of marriage to work together with. That's wonderful. I think, you know, calling back to a few weeks ago when we heard from your colleague, Dr. Card. I think one of the questions from the audience expressed some disappointment that data driven research doesn't always have the kind of real world impact and acceleration to policy change that it can. And so I appreciate you sharing this really heartening example of how research is being done at this university is having a profound global effect on somewhat intractable problems like breaking the cycle of poverty. Okay, so now I want to, oh yeah, we got to fee out luck in the Ed discussion. So I now want to turn to some questions from our in person audience. Those of you who are watching the live stream, feel free to post additional questions and discussion. And we're going to try to alternate as much as possible, but we're going to begin with a few questions here in the audience. So I have a question that when you were going to implement this, the initial efforts, what were some issues that came in implementing it and how did you navigate them? There were a lot of issues. There were a lot of issues on design that we dealt with with our partners. There were questions about how to structure the randomization. It was very new at the time. It hadn't really been done. The NGO wasn't familiar with it. Even just explaining the process and the methods was a challenge. That was really a methodological issue. There were a lot of logistical issues. I didn't put the photos up, but in that first year and 98 because of all the El Nino flooding. In January and February of 1998, even when we were trying to collect the baseline data, Just transportation was so disrupted that that became a big challenge. There were really, I think, both issues on the methodological side, the partner side, logistical side, that made it very challenging. Sometimes right at the start of the study, we weren't sure if we'd be able to carry out the study. There was an election in Kenya in December of 1997, that was a violent election. I was supposed to get on a plane to launch the study January 2. There was still election violence going on. I didn't know if I should, my mother didn't know if I should, you know, at the time. But so there were a lot of challenges. I think it's a common theme with a lot of research that we have a goal, but there's often a lot of barriers that aren't necessarily intellectual barriers. Sometimes they are key intellectual barriers. But there's often just practical funding and logistical barriers that we have to fight through. Okay, Hello. Yeah, thank you. It's very inspiring. I have a question. With the result and impact, did you do like some corporate comparatives with areas you did not deliver the pills or how did you do any comparison with the place you did not do the research and saw the effects because especially since you mentioned that you caught on a period where it was blowing up of worms. Yeah, maybe you can answer. Yeah, The comparison really is within the area in the sense that those early groups, the group 1.2 schools that were chosen to get the pills first received the pills up to three years before the group three schools. And that's really where all the comparisons are. So it's really all the schools in the same area. Some randomly chosen to get the pills up to three years before the others. Because the NGO is just gradually expanding the program. That's really the comparison. Those group three schools eventually get the pills. But there's three years of childhood say where the group one schools are getting basically have better health. That's the comparison that we rely on here. We don't really compare out of this region. It's all within the region. That's really where the randomized control trial methodology is useful for us. Thank you. Thank you for your talk. It was very interesting and I was wondering, as your job as a researcher within this field, to what degree do you communicate the findings outside of just publishing this research with the governments directly involved with the people who would be best served with knowing this information and just interacting with those that aren't within the economics field, just getting this information out there. I think that's a great question and I think one of the reasons why there was so much policy impact was from very early on. We shared the results very widely. My co author and I, within the first few years of getting data, we're presenting this. We presented it. I went to Geneva to present the World Health Organization. We presented at the World Bank, those kind of global forums. We presented to government ministries in Kenya. We had town halls and presentations, even in Busca, Kenya, with local government officials where we were working to share the results with the community there. And that was all just in 2002, 2003, 2004, right when the results were coming out. And I think that helped to build momentum behind the results. We put in that extra, we published the paper. It was published, well, there's been all this academic recognition and the Nobel and all these things, which are amazing. But we put a lot of effort into policy outreach, writing, op eds, that became a big part of our lives for several years as well. I do think there was an element of chance and we just feel so fortunate that policymakers picked up on the results, but we also got it out to them early on. And that's one of the things that Sega the center here does, is beyond funding research. The center does more than an individual researcher can in creating links to policymakers and media to really try to get the results out there. You mentioned something about how you had to collaborate with local African researchers to incorporate like African ethics or Kenyan ethics, I'm not too sure into your research methods. What exactly were they and how would they have differed from if you just done research here? Yeah. I mean, this is something that's been really central to the work from the start. Even this first project was in collaboration with the Ministry of Health in Kenya, as well as the Kenyan NGO, et cetera. So there were those collaborations from the start, but there were some ethical issues. I'll tell you at the start, there was some debate in the medical community about whether the deworming pills were safe or not. For pregnant women. Now, of course, these were kids, but some of the kids were girls who were 14, 15 in theory, some of them might be pregnant at the time. And there was debate with our partners in the Ministry of Health on whether those older girls should be excluded from treatment. So those are the kind of ethical issues that the NGO we worked with, the Ministry of Health, and our team had to discuss and navigate. Now, it proved later on that these pills are very safe even for pregnant women. Today, this isn't even an issue. But at the time, we had to navigate those issues and work in partnership with the ministry in Kenya and really follow their directives as to what they saw as ethical in Kenya. We've always taken this research through ethical review boards in Kenya as well as in Berkeley. That's been really central to the research from the start. We have time for one more question today and we have a hand over here. Yeah. Really appreciate your time, Dr. Miguel. It sounds like a lot of this experiment and research shows that access to education has incredible outcomes. You mentioned that if there weren't worms in a certain place, the magnitude of difference would of course be different. I'm interested in if you have other ideas that can help or the next barriers that you'd like to see experiments in, like what's the next space to move in as the world gets better and we have less worms and stuff? Yeah, that's a great question. There's really been a whole body of research on education, I would say. In education that may be the sector within development economics, where there have been the most RCT's, where there's the greatest evidence base. Now there's been a whole range of different experiments on everything from teacher incentives to funding textbooks, to funding classroom construction, to other institutional reforms. There is a body of evidence now showing that those educational investments can have long run effects. That said, most studies still are pretty short run. Most studies in development economics look at one to two year effects. We wrote a review article a few years ago trying to find all the long term studies we could find in development economics. And there are like a couple dozen out of the thousands of RCT's, only a couple of dozen have really tracked people for more than seven or eight years. I think that's where the evidence base is lacking. But the few studies that do exist suggest that, for instance, making sure people get more access to secondary schooling can have huge effects on their earnings in the long run. But that's an area where more research needs to be done. That's all the time that we have for questions today. But Dr. Miguel has generously offered to linger a little bit. So if you have additional questions, you're welcome to come up to the stage and speak with him afterward. In the meantime, please join me in thanking Dr. Miguel again for his talk today. Thank you. Oh, thanks. Tell me. Yes. There's $400 